OSDOCS-18942: adds observability to MCP gateway (#109810)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/proc-mcp-gateway-otel.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// *mcp_gateway_config/mcp-gateway-observe.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE

> [id="con-mcp-gateway-otel_{context}"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[id="proc-mcp-gateway-otel_{context}"]
```

Author: great catch TY!

* Discover which component generated an error, such as Envoy, an MCP gateway component, or a backend MCP server.
* Understand how requests flow through the system components.
* See which tools were called and which MCP servers executed those tools.
* Understand where to find relevant logs for each component.
* Examine metrics about tool call patterns, success rates, and error rates.
* Examine {DTShortName} across the request path.

.Prerequisites

* You installed {mcpg}.
* You installed {prodname}.
* You configured a `Gateway` object.
* You are logged into a running {ocp} cluster with an `admin` role.
* You installed {OTELName}.
* You configured the {TempoName} for traces.
* You installed the OpenShift Logging Operator (Loki).
* You configured an S3-compatible persistent storage volume for Loki to store long-term MCP tool call logs.

.Procedure

. Use the following example YAML to create a collector in your MCP gateway deployment namespace:
+
.Example OpenTelemetryCollector custom resource (CR)
[source,yaml,subs="+quotes"]
----
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
metadata:

>   name: _<mcp-otel-collector>_

Reviewer 2: Is this a user-replaced variable? Wondering if it should be underscores as opposed to dashes:

I know you generally follow [RHSSG](https://redhat-documentation.github.io/supplementary-style-guide/#user-replaced-values) with the italics but I think their examples also use underscores. Might not be appropriate here. 

```suggestion
  name: _<mcp_otel_collector>_
```

>   namespace: _<mcp-gateway-system>_

Reviewer 2: Same here.

spec:
  mode: deployment
  config:
    receivers:
      otlp:
        protocols:
          http:
            endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4318
          grpc:
            endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4317
    exporters:
      otlp/tempo:
        endpoint: tempo-gateway-http.openshift-tracing.svc.cluster.local:4317
        tls:
          insecure: true
      debug:
        verbosity: basic
    service:
      pipelines:
        traces:
          receivers: [otlp]
          exporters: [otlp/tempo, debug]
        logs:
          receivers: [otlp]
          exporters: [debug]
----
+

> * Replace the value of `metadata.name:` with the name you want to assign to this collector.

Reviewer 2: Any idea how strict we're being with parallelism here? Most of the examples in https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/102276/changes#diff-f56ed7789c058417c26332b57d44e263ea5ef71911864348aa2f7587d54f2a0fR126 are parallel. Might be worth making them all the same:

```suggestion
* The  `metadata.name:` resource specifies the name that you want to assign to this collector. 
```

Author: most of this doc set uses the "replace" method, so I'll keep it

* Replace the value of `metadata.namespace:` with the namespace of your MCP gateway deployment.

> * The `spec.mode.config.exporters:` field value points to {DTShortName}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `spec.config.exporters:` field value points to {DTShortName}.
```

> * The setting, `spec.mode.config.exporters.otlp/tempo.tls.insecure: true` is for internal cluster communication without TLS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The setting, `spec.config.exporters.otlp/tempo.tls.insecure: true` is for internal cluster communication without TLS.
```

. Apply the following environment variables to your {ocp} cluster by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc set env deployment/mcp-gateway \
  OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT="http://mcp-otel-collector-collector.mcp-gateway-system.svc.cluster.local:4318" \
  OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_INSECURE="true" \
  OTEL_SERVICE_NAME="mcp-gateway"
----
+
When {OTELName} creates a collector, the service name is `[metadata.name]-collector`.

> . Optional. If you want to send traces to one collector and logs to a different one, set the following additional environment variables:

Reviewer 2: This is beyond the scope of this PR probably, but I do wonder if an example command could help clarify this for some users. Probably isn't necessary.

.. `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_TRACES_ENDPOINT` to override the endpoint for traces
.. `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_LOGS_ENDPOINT` to override the endpoint for logs

. If you are using {TempoName}, select your stack name as the data source in the OpenShift Web Console *Observe > Traces* dashboard. For example, `tempo-mcp`.

. After you select the stack name, you can consult an attribute in your OpenShift Web Console *OpenShift Observe > Traces* dashboard to find where errors have occurred or to gather information for trend identification.

> * You can also filter by `service.name="mcp-gateway"`.

Reviewer 2: Would this be better if it was a bullet point under the previous step, since that step is about filtering? I could be confused.

Author: I think you have to filter here after you select the stack name.
